Here are 12 things you need to know
if you're considering investing in an investment property,
meaning real estate that is not your primary residence.
Number one, set up a company.
If you're gonna invest in real estate,
then please set up a company,
like a limited liability company,
or another type of company that will protect you
and insure that you're okay if your company
gets sued for whatever reason.
Of course, hire a lawyer and an accountant
to help you understand the tax implications
and legal implications when it comes to
signing real estate investment contracts
as every region in every country is different.
The investment property has expenses,
so of course these expenses should make the amount
of income tax that you pay on this investment property less.
That's why you kinda set up as an individual company.
I'd love to see you get to a point where most of your income
comes from investments like real estate,
so you can quit if you work for somebody else.
Just as a quick side note,
don't invest in time shares, please.
If you buy a second home as a vacation house,
it's not a great investment most of the time.
As these are discretionary real estate investments.
These investments are the first ones to lose
huge amounts of value if the economy turns.
Try to invest in places that you can rent to others
as their primary residence.
If this is the case, then of course, make sure
that it's in a very good school district, if applicable.
Number two, property management.
If you don't have time to collect the rent,
or do maintenance and upkeep, then consider hiring
a landlord or somebody to manage the property.
Perhaps you can pay them a certain percentage
of the rent that's charged.
And separately, anyone know the name of this landlord here?
Yes, I am dating myself.
Okay, moving on.
Number three, making income statement
for only this investment.
If you plan on investing in real estate,
then aside from your own house,
then please consider making an income statement
for each investment property.
Make it similar to what we did in exercise number two,
meaning that revenue is the rental price
paid for the real estate, and the expenses
include all expenses that deal with the rental,
meaning maintenance charges, property tax,
your mortgage on this residence, if applicable,
as well as income taxes that you're gonna pay, et cetera.
Think of every individual piece of real estate you own
as having its own separate income statement.
And spend a lot of time on making
this real estate income statement
before buying the investment property, please.
Always be conservative, so before you buy
that investment property, make the income statement,
to make sure that you're actually gonna be
cashflow positive on it,
meaning you're gonna make money on it.
That's number one, number two make sure to
hire a lawyer to look at it, and look at the documents
(mumbles), and an accountant as well.
Have your accountant look at your income statement as well
and see if it makes sense.
Because we are not experts globally
in real estate investing, meaning I'm not,
I don't know if you are, maybe you are,
that's why it makes sense to get an accountant
take a look at it.
Number four, who is the target market?
Please understand what type of person
will rent from you if you buy this property.
Understand the demographics.
Is the renter a bachelor and wants to be close
to restaurants and cool bars?
Is the renter an executive living out of town
and wants to be close to the airport or close to the work,
the city, wherever it might be?
Is the renter a family that would love to be close
to great public schools, et cetera?
Remember, location, location, location.
Number five, DYI, meaning do it yourself, DYI.
Try to do renovations yourself
as contractors can bankrupt you.
Do everything yourself, except for anything dangerous
involving electricity or big machines, of course.
Use YouTube for help on how to do
certain renovations like installing carpets
or putting in crown moldings, et cetera.
I've done this, and yeah I've made a bunch of mistakes,
and you might as well, but you know what?
You're gonna save yourself so much money
and it feels so good doing it yourself too.
Make it a family event too, if you can.
If you want to, as a way to kind of teach the kids
about business.
I renovated my attic, and I turned it into
a man cave recently.
I had no idea what I was doing.
But I watched a lot of YouTube videos,
and I asked the sales reps at my local hardware stores,
called Home Depot and Lowe's.
I asked these sales reps, you know,
just for a lot of general instructions.
The renovations cost me very little.
I put in my own, actually, I'll show you the equipment,
I brought it here.
I put in my own carpets using this thing.
It's pretty cool, it actually melts the carpet together
if you use more than one piece of carpet at a time.
That's actually how they, that's how they glue together
carpet on the ground, I didn't know that,
but you put a (mumbles) under it and melt it, whatever.
I know enough to be dangerous.
I also used, I used this thing here,
to make sure that the wall and the floorboards
look like they were in sync and there's no gap between them.
I think it's called a caulking device
or something like that, whatever.
I bought cheap supplies from IKEA to hide my storage.
That's just this one here, you see how I pull this down
right here, these cost next to nothing from IKEA.
I know it looks pretty cheap but whatever.
I made my own door, to the rest of the attic.
I used some leftover wood I had.
I added these hooks here to the ceiling
so I can enclose myself in drapes.
When I'm just recording, just audio only,
like all the Excel exercises you see in this course
so I wouldn't get echoes.
I know it's really far from perfect,
but I saved a lot of money.
For the floorboards, I got one of these things
which can actually help you to cut in different angles
and put these things on.
Floorboards, I think they're called.
It was a lot of fun, kids had a good time doing it as well,
and we saved a lot of money too.
Far from perfect but it was fun.
And also, anybody know what seat this is from, here?
I used to go to my dad, to games with my dad,
and this was a seat from that stadium
which no longer exist.
Number six, restrictions.
Are there zoning issues?
Meaning, can you rent this to a business
or just to people that want to live in it?
Also, are there any Airbnb restrictions?
Some regions have this stupid restrictions.
And if it's an apartment, is it a co-op or a condo,
meaning, are you allowed to rent it out?
Just find out if there's any really stupid condo laws
pertaining just to the building that you're considering
buying in, like no kids, or pets, or whatever it is,
stuff like that.
Number seven, comparable recent sales.
The value of any investment you make,
is all based on recent sales of similar companies,
whether it's stocks, bonds that are high quality,
commodities, that sort of things.
Comparable recent sales.
What of houses or apartment similar to this one
sold for recently?
You don't wanna overpay, obviously.
Number eight, when you're talking to your accountant,
ask your accountant if there's any tax issues
or tax benefits to doing this.
Talk to your accountant first before buying,
as only a house you might live in gets you tax breaks,
but only a second house might not.
Make sure you hire the right real estate expert lawyer
to look at the house or the apartments.
There could be asbestos issues, if it's an older building.
There could be awful plumbing or insects, et cetera.
Just don't sign anything without your lawyer first
reviewing every word.
If you do sign something, make sure,
make sure it says this deal is subject to inspection.
I've done this before, you can bring your mobile phone
and your mobile phone charger, and plug them
into the outlets to see if all the plugs
are getting electricity, that sort of thing.
Also if you can pull up the carpets,
as sometimes the floors might look better,
or it'd be done another carpets,
which might actually enhance the rental price.
Number 10, never never never buy the first place you see
if you're new to this place.
I'm gonna say it again.
Never buy the first place you see if you're new to this.
Your first investment in real estate
should be a very small investment,
like a small apartment.
So you can understand the issues
and upside too when investing in real estate.
In many countries there are really entertaining
television shows that show someone buying a place
and renting it out or fixing it up a bit.
Watch those shows as you can get great ideas
on what issues to watch out for when investing
in real estate.
All the star has got to be aligned for you,
for your first real estate investment property.
The reason I say that is because real estate
can be highly illiquid, meaning it can take a long time
to sell real estate.
Illiquid investments tend to own us
in tough economic environments rather than
the other way around.
Number 11, finding cheap real estate via foreclosures.
You can go to foreclosures or auctions
as you could get a bargain when you have
a motivated seller.
My next door neighbor, they bought their house
where I live now for next to nothing
because they bought it in a foreclosure.
So just search online for a foreclosures where you live.
Number 12, do your own research.
I've stressed this a few times at least in this course.
Please do your own research as real estate brokers
are very biased, kinda like the media,
they wanna get their commissions to state the obvious.
Lastly, if you're selling your place,
staging it is actually a good investment,
meaning renting furniture and having each room
have a minimalist look and feel to it.
The return on minor landscaping is actually very high.
The rule of thumb here is that for every dollar you spent
on a tree, the return on investment is 10 times higher
than the cost of that tree in just a couple of years.
It's good to kind of plan advanced to,
let's say you own your own place and you wanna sell it
two or three years down the road.
Plant those trees now.
And as always, try to do everything yourself
which is safe, because it's a lot of fun to do
and it's good money lesson for the family
if you have kids, and you'll save a lot of money
doing it yourself as well.